README.md, before:

# Chrome Headless Testing

This repository is to demonstrate headless testing with Chrome in headless cloud CI servers. This source code demonstrates the following key features with Chrome / Chromium:

## Toggle headless or normal mode

It will be handy to run the tests in Chrome as normal mode in local development machine and see what's going on in the page as we develop new features.  However, for headless CI servers, the tests should be able to run in headless mode. `chromeHeadless` system property is used to toggle between two modes. Headless mode can be acitivated by setting `-DchromeHeadless=true` in IDE or build tool, otherwise the tests will run in normal mode

**Example code:**

[WebDriverFactory.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/TestCommon/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/test_common/webdriver/WebDriverFactory.java)

## Avoiding Xvfb

In lot of examples, Xvfb (Virtual Frame Buffer) was used as a solution for web driver based tests running in headless CI server. However, when running large number of tests (typically 600+) for an enterprise application, Xvfb crashed during the test run. This happened frequently, even after setting DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=/dev/null. As a result the build was red due to single failure and the build become flaky. After using the Chrome in native headless mode (--headless), the build became reliable and never failed for wrong reasons.

## Browser Mob Proxy

Chrome WebDriver doesn't support adding or manipulating additional request headers while navigating to a page. This feature is useful in many situations to test an application which relies on request headers injected by load balancers. Hence, we can make use of Browser Mob Proxy library which acts as an Http and Https proxy for Chrome Browser and also allows the test to manipulate the request headers.

**Example code:**

[WebDriverTestConfigurations.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/IntegrationTests/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/configuration/WebDriverTestConfigurations.java)

[CustomHeaderPageIT.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/IntegrationTests/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/CustomHeaderPageIT.java)

## Testing application through non-localhost domain with self-signed SSL

This is the most extreme case of headless testing with Chrome. Chrome will not load the page if the certificate is invalid (not trusted or the domain name is not part of Subject Alternative Name field) in the certificate. To deal with these cases, we have do some complex setup. Please read towards the end of this page which covers in detail about testing an application with non-localhost domains with self-signed certificates.

## Capturing screenshots

For developers or QAs to debug a test failure which uses WebDriver, tests reports alone as not sufficient to understand what's going on. Hence, it will handy to capture the screenshot of the final state of the WebDriver before test completion. This will give a clue on what was display on the browser, which in turn caused a test to fail. We can make use of `TestWatcher` rule available in JUnit framework to capture screenshots on test completion and save the image with name of the test itself.

**Example code:**

[AbstractBaseIT.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/IntegrationTests/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/AbstractBaseIT.java)

**Location of screenshots:**

The screenshots will be located in one of the following location based on whether the test is run through Maven, Gradle or IntelliJ IDEA

* IntegrationTests/target/webdriver_screenshots
* IntegrationTests/build/webdriver_screenshots
* IntegrationTests/out/webdriver_screenshots


## Headless Travis CI Build status
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting)

[Headless Travis CI configuration file](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/.travis.yml)


## Classification of setup needed for headless testing
Headless testing with chrome can be classified into following categories as listed below. Based on the test category, test setup needs additional web driver configurations and tools (like proxies). This demo repository contains code that covers all these categories.

#### Simple setup
Testing the application on localhost on http or https (using self signed certificate). This just needs `--allow-insecure-localhost` command line argument in chrome driver configuration

#### Medium setup
Testing the application on localhost which needs additional http request headers (like X-Forwared-For) to extract additional information from headers injected by load balancer. These headers can setup using Browser Mob Proxy (open source library) which can act as an proxy for Chrome browser. This needs `--allow-insecure-localhost` command line argument and setting the proxy in chrome driver configuration

#### Complex setup
Testing the application on non-localhost domains like local.example.com with self-signed certificate and need to send additional http request headers. These are extreme type of tests for an application which:
* contains domain aware functionalities
* deals with secure cookies
* extracts information from request headers injected by load balancers

This needs all of the following:
* set up browser mob proxy with the same self-signed certificate as the application uses
* set up browser mob proxy as proxy in chrome driver configuration
* import the self signed certificate in the operating system certificate store, so that Chrome browser will trust the certificate
* the self signed certificate should contain the domain used for testing under Subject Alternative Name attribute


## Required Softwares, Tools and Version
* Java JDK Version: Oracle Java 1.8.0_144
* Apache Maven Version: 3.3.9
* Gradle Version: 4.4.1
* Chrome (Windows & Mac OS) Browser / Chromium (Linux OS) Browser: 62
* chromedriver: 2.32 [chromedriver installation steps](http://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2018/01/installing-chromedriver-for-selenium.html)
* Git Client: Any latest version
* Integrated Development Environment: Any version of IntelliJ Idea or Eclipse



## Running the build

Note: For gradle users on Windows, please use **gradlew.bat** instead of **./gradlew** in the following commands

#### Full Build (non headless mode)

The following command generates artifacts, executes java unit tests, javascript unit tests and integration tests.

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install
    
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build
   
   
   
#### Full Build (headless mode)

The following command executes the same stuffs as above command with Chrome / Chromium browser in headless mode
    
###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DchromeHeadless=true
    
###### For Gradle users
     
    ./gradlew clean build -DchromeHeadless=true


    
## Run Java Script unit tests as standalone

To run the java script unit tests in standalone mode, start the JasmineSpec runner application using the following command

###### For Maven users

    mvn spring-boot:run -pl JavaScriptJasmineUnitTests 
    
###### For Gradle users
     
    ./gradlew :JavaScriptJasmineUnitTests:bootRun
    
And open the JasmineSpec runner url in a browser

**http://localhost:9090/JasmineSpecRunner.html** 


    
## Pass the path of browser and chromedriver

The following command allows you to specify the installation location if the browser and / or chromedriver is not availabe in PATH of your Operating System. This is particularly convenient in CI environments
    
###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DchromeDriverBinary=/usr/lib/chromium-browser/chromedriver -DchromeBinary=/usr/bin/chromium-browser 
       
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build -DchromeDriverBinary=/usr/lib/chromium-browser/chromedriver -DchromeBinary=/usr/bin/chromium-browser


    
## Run the sample application

###### For Maven users

    mvn spring-boot:run -pl SampleApplication
    
###### For Gradle users
    
    ./gradlew :SampleApplication:bootRun
    
###### Urls

    https://localhost:8080/app/index.html
    https://localhost:8080/thymeleafAngularDemo
    https://localhost:8080/showCustomHeader
    https://localhost:8080/viewCookie


   
## Run the sample application as jar

Generate the jar file and start the application

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DskipTests=true
    java -jar SampleApplication/target/sample-application-1.0-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar
    
###### For Gradle users
    
    ./gradlew clean assemble
    java -jar SampleApplication/build/libs/sample-application-1.0-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar 


 
## Run non-localhost tests

These are special type of tests which tests the application on https://local.example.com and https://local.example.org using additional dns entries in the operating system.

Configurations to add additional dns entries for Travis CI is captured in the '.travis.yml' file. This file is located in the top directory of this repository and it is used to configure and run CI build in a headless server on the cloud.
 
#### For development machines:

Add the following lines in the respective file
* For Linux: /etc/hosts (use sudo)
* For Mac: /private/etc/hosts (use sudo)
* For Windows: C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts

###### Lines to be added:

    127.0.0.1   local.example.com
    127.0.0.1   local.example.org

Please refer to the following link for more information about additional dns entries in your host file

[Add additional dns host entry](https://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2018/01/how-to-add-additional-routes-mapping-to.html)

    
#### Command to run non-localhost tests

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true
    
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true
    

#### Command to run non-localhost tests in headless mode

To run non-localhost tests in headless mode, we need to import the self signed certificate and mark it as trusted certificate in the Operating System's Trust Store.

Otherwise Chrome / Chromium will not load the pages under headless mode.

Commands to import the self signed certificate used by the SampleApplication has been captured in the travis-ci.yml file. Hence the build is green in Travis CI Build.

For development machine, please import **SampleApplication/src/main/resources/keystore.p12** with password **my_keystore_password**.

The following links explains how to import .p12 file in various operating systems:
* For Mac: [Import .p12 file in Mac](https://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2018/01/import-personal-information-exchange.html)
* For Windows: [Import .p12 file in Windows](https://support.quovadisglobal.com/kb/a66/how-do-i-install-a-digital-certificate-onto-windows-7.aspx)
* For Linux: [Import .p12 file in Linux](https://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2017/12/import-self-signed-in-linux-for-chrome.html) 

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true -DchromeHeadless=true
    
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true -DchromeHeadless=true

Commit message:

Including spring boot and dependency injection in README.md

README.md, after:

# Chrome Headless Testing

This repository is to demonstrate headless testing with Chrome in headless cloud CI servers. Spring boot and dependency injection is used in this repository, still the code can be ported to projects using no frameworks or other frameworks. This source code demonstrates the following key features with Chrome / Chromium:

## Toggle headless or normal mode

It will be handy to run the tests in Chrome as normal mode in local development machine and see what's going on in the page as we develop new features.  However, for headless CI servers, the tests should be able to run in headless mode. `chromeHeadless` system property is used to toggle between two modes. Headless mode can be acitivated by setting `-DchromeHeadless=true` in IDE or build tool, otherwise the tests will run in normal mode

**Example code:**

[WebDriverFactory.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/TestCommon/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/test_common/webdriver/WebDriverFactory.java)

## Avoiding Xvfb

In lot of examples, Xvfb (Virtual Frame Buffer) was used as a solution for web driver based tests running in headless CI server. However, when running large number of tests (typically 600+) for an enterprise application, Xvfb crashed during the test run. This happened frequently, even after setting DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=/dev/null. As a result the build was red due to single failure and the build become flaky. After using the Chrome in native headless mode (--headless), the build became reliable and never failed for wrong reasons.

## Browser Mob Proxy

Chrome WebDriver doesn't support adding or manipulating additional request headers while navigating to a page. This feature is useful in many situations to test an application which relies on request headers injected by load balancers. Hence, we can make use of Browser Mob Proxy library which acts as an Http and Https proxy for Chrome Browser and also allows the test to manipulate the request headers.

**Example code:**

[WebDriverTestConfigurations.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/IntegrationTests/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/configuration/WebDriverTestConfigurations.java)

[CustomHeaderPageIT.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/IntegrationTests/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/CustomHeaderPageIT.java)

## Testing application through non-localhost domain with self-signed SSL

This is the most extreme case of headless testing with Chrome. Chrome will not load the page if the certificate is invalid (not trusted or the domain name is not part of Subject Alternative Name field) in the certificate. To deal with these cases, we have do some complex setup. Please read towards the end of this page which covers in detail about testing an application with non-localhost domains with self-signed certificates.

## Capturing screenshots

For developers or QAs to debug a test failure which uses WebDriver, tests reports alone as not sufficient to understand what's going on. Hence, it will handy to capture the screenshot of the final state of the WebDriver before test completion. This will give a clue on what was display on the browser, which in turn caused a test to fail. We can make use of `TestWatcher` rule available in JUnit framework to capture screenshots on test completion and save the image with name of the test itself.

**Example code:**

[AbstractBaseIT.java](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/IntegrationTests/src/test/java/com/harishkannarao/demo/AbstractBaseIT.java)

**Location of screenshots:**

The screenshots will be located in one of the following location based on whether the test is run through Maven, Gradle or IntelliJ IDEA

* IntegrationTests/target/webdriver_screenshots
* IntegrationTests/build/webdriver_screenshots
* IntegrationTests/out/webdriver_screenshots


## Headless Travis CI Build status
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting)

[Headless Travis CI configuration file](https://github.com/harishkannarao/ChromeHeadlessTesting/blob/master/.travis.yml)


## Classification of setup needed for headless testing
Headless testing with chrome can be classified into following categories as listed below. Based on the test category, test setup needs additional web driver configurations and tools (like proxies). This demo repository contains code that covers all these categories.

#### Simple setup
Testing the application on localhost on http or https (using self signed certificate). This just needs `--allow-insecure-localhost` command line argument in chrome driver configuration

#### Medium setup
Testing the application on localhost which needs additional http request headers (like X-Forwared-For) to extract additional information from headers injected by load balancer. These headers can setup using Browser Mob Proxy (open source library) which can act as an proxy for Chrome browser. This needs `--allow-insecure-localhost` command line argument and setting the proxy in chrome driver configuration

#### Complex setup
Testing the application on non-localhost domains like local.example.com with self-signed certificate and need to send additional http request headers. These are extreme type of tests for an application which:
* contains domain aware functionalities
* deals with secure cookies
* extracts information from request headers injected by load balancers

This needs all of the following:
* set up browser mob proxy with the same self-signed certificate as the application uses
* set up browser mob proxy as proxy in chrome driver configuration
* import the self signed certificate in the operating system certificate store, so that Chrome browser will trust the certificate
* the self signed certificate should contain the domain used for testing under Subject Alternative Name attribute


## Required Softwares, Tools and Version
* Java JDK Version: Oracle Java 1.8.0_144
* Apache Maven Version: 3.3.9
* Gradle Version: 4.4.1
* Chrome (Windows & Mac OS) Browser / Chromium (Linux OS) Browser: 62
* chromedriver: 2.32 [chromedriver installation steps](http://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2018/01/installing-chromedriver-for-selenium.html)
* Git Client: Any latest version
* Integrated Development Environment: Any version of IntelliJ Idea or Eclipse



## Running the build

Note: For gradle users on Windows, please use **gradlew.bat** instead of **./gradlew** in the following commands

#### Full Build (non headless mode)

The following command generates artifacts, executes java unit tests, javascript unit tests and integration tests.

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install
    
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build
   
   
   
#### Full Build (headless mode)

The following command executes the same stuffs as above command with Chrome / Chromium browser in headless mode
    
###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DchromeHeadless=true
    
###### For Gradle users
     
    ./gradlew clean build -DchromeHeadless=true


    
## Run Java Script unit tests as standalone

To run the java script unit tests in standalone mode, start the JasmineSpec runner application using the following command

###### For Maven users

    mvn spring-boot:run -pl JavaScriptJasmineUnitTests 
    
###### For Gradle users
     
    ./gradlew :JavaScriptJasmineUnitTests:bootRun
    
And open the JasmineSpec runner url in a browser

**http://localhost:9090/JasmineSpecRunner.html** 


    
## Pass the path of browser and chromedriver

The following command allows you to specify the installation location if the browser and / or chromedriver is not availabe in PATH of your Operating System. This is particularly convenient in CI environments
    
###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DchromeDriverBinary=/usr/lib/chromium-browser/chromedriver -DchromeBinary=/usr/bin/chromium-browser 
       
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build -DchromeDriverBinary=/usr/lib/chromium-browser/chromedriver -DchromeBinary=/usr/bin/chromium-browser


    
## Run the sample application

###### For Maven users

    mvn spring-boot:run -pl SampleApplication
    
###### For Gradle users
    
    ./gradlew :SampleApplication:bootRun
    
###### Urls

    https://localhost:8080/app/index.html
    https://localhost:8080/thymeleafAngularDemo
    https://localhost:8080/showCustomHeader
    https://localhost:8080/viewCookie


   
## Run the sample application as jar

Generate the jar file and start the application

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DskipTests=true
    java -jar SampleApplication/target/sample-application-1.0-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar
    
###### For Gradle users
    
    ./gradlew clean assemble
    java -jar SampleApplication/build/libs/sample-application-1.0-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar 


 
## Run non-localhost tests

These are special type of tests which tests the application on https://local.example.com and https://local.example.org using additional dns entries in the operating system.

Configurations to add additional dns entries for Travis CI is captured in the '.travis.yml' file. This file is located in the top directory of this repository and it is used to configure and run CI build in a headless server on the cloud.
 
#### For development machines:

Add the following lines in the respective file
* For Linux: /etc/hosts (use sudo)
* For Mac: /private/etc/hosts (use sudo)
* For Windows: C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts

###### Lines to be added:

    127.0.0.1   local.example.com
    127.0.0.1   local.example.org

Please refer to the following link for more information about additional dns entries in your host file

[Add additional dns host entry](https://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2018/01/how-to-add-additional-routes-mapping-to.html)

    
#### Command to run non-localhost tests

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true
    
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true
    

#### Command to run non-localhost tests in headless mode

To run non-localhost tests in headless mode, we need to import the self signed certificate and mark it as trusted certificate in the Operating System's Trust Store.

Otherwise Chrome / Chromium will not load the pages under headless mode.

Commands to import the self signed certificate used by the SampleApplication has been captured in the travis-ci.yml file. Hence the build is green in Travis CI Build.

For development machine, please import **SampleApplication/src/main/resources/keystore.p12** with password **my_keystore_password**.

The following links explains how to import .p12 file in various operating systems:
* For Mac: [Import .p12 file in Mac](https://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2018/01/import-personal-information-exchange.html)
* For Windows: [Import .p12 file in Windows](https://support.quovadisglobal.com/kb/a66/how-do-i-install-a-digital-certificate-onto-windows-7.aspx)
* For Linux: [Import .p12 file in Linux](https://harish-kannarao.blogspot.co.uk/2017/12/import-self-signed-in-linux-for-chrome.html) 

###### For Maven users

    mvn clean install -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true -DchromeHeadless=true
    
###### For Gradle users

    ./gradlew clean build -DrunNonLocalHostTests=true -DchromeHeadless=true
